Add general information about revocation (#209)
kairos-io/kairos-docs: content/en/docs/Advanced/revoking-secureboot-access.md

---
title: "Revoking secure boot access"
linkTitle: "Revoking secure boot access"
weight: 10
date: 2022-06-12
---

This document describes how an administrator can prevent certain OS images from
booting on their hardware in the context of ["Trusted Boot"]({{< relref "../architecture/trustedboot" >}}).

> Two different scenarios will be covered, with the process being only slightly different for each case.

Reviewer: it talks about two scenarios but I only see one bellow

Author: I pushed a commit. I tried to refer to scenario 1 and only present the differences to avoid duplicating the whole thing.

> ## Scenario 1 - Signing certificate no longer trusted

Reviewer: what does this actually mean, that you sign a certificate which is no longer trusted? or that a signed certificate is no longer trusted?

Author: The latter. Maybe ` Signing certificate is no longer trusted` ?

Reviewer: yup sounds good to me

The process of creating signed images that can be trusted to boot, requires the
signing keys to be safe and only accessible to the vendor that produces the OS images.

In the unfortunate case in which a signing certificate has been compromised, it's
important that the keys is blacklisted it on every machine.

> Failing to do so, will allow be possible for the malicious actor with access to the key,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Failing to do so, will make it possible for the malicious actor with access to the key,
```

to generate OS images that the system will accept to boot.
This will allow them boot and decrypt the filesystem, thus gaining full access
to the data on that machine and full control over it.

The UEFI firmware has a special "database" in which blacklisted certificates can
be "enrolled" (image hashes can also be enrolled, but more on that on the next scenario).

> If only one machine is running the signed OS images and physical access to that machine is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If only one machine is running the signed OS images, and physical access to that machine is
```

that another approach is required.

Before going over the steps on how to "blacklist" a certificate by enrolling it
in `dbx`, here is some useful information which will make the steps more clear.

### From "pem" to "auth"

The signing certificates are usually stored in one of the well known certificate
formats, e.g. "pem". If a certificate is stored in a different format, it's usually
possible to convert to "pem" with some utility. For this reason we will assume
the certificate is in the "pem" format from now on.

There are various utilities in Linux that allow enrolling certificates in the UEFI
databases but they require those certs to be in a specific format usually in the
ESL (EFI Signature List) or the signed version of the same format, the "signed variables"
format. Using the signed version has the benefit that no private keys need to be present
in order to do the enrollement, while using the unsigned format needs the private
keys to be present.

If you followed [the instructions to create signing keys]({{< relref "../Installation/trustedboot.md#key-generation" >}}), you should have a directory with a `db.pem` certificate. This is the certificate

> we will blacklist. To do so we need to convert it to the "esl" format and then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we will blacklist. To do so ,we need to convert it to the "esl" format and then
```

> sign it to create the final `.auth` file which will be used for enrollement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sign it to create the final `.auth` file, which will be used for enrollement.
```

The utilities used are usually shipped in the various distros under a name like `efitools` (e.g. in Ubuntu). Here are the commands to generate the needed signed authenticated variables file:

```bash
$ export UUID=`uuidgen`
$ cert-to-efi-sig-list -g "Kairos-$UUID" keys/db.pem db-dbx.esl
$ sign-efi-sig-list -c keys/KEK.pem -k keys/KEK.key dbx db-dbx.esl db-dbx.auth
```

(Notice how we sign the `.auth` file using the "KEK" key so that enrollement is allowed)

### PCRs and disk encryption

As described in the ["Trusted Boot"]({{< relref "../architecture/trustedboot" >}}) documentation page,
the decryption of the disk partitions is bound to some PCR registers on the TPM chip.
Specifically registers 11 and 7.
There are 2 ways to bind to a PCR register, the direct and the indirect. You can
read more in the [`systemd-cryptenroll` docs](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/latest/systemd-cryptenroll.html#TPM2%20PCRs%20and%20policies) but in a nutshell, the indirect binding
allows the actual value of the PCR to change while the direct one does not.

> For this reason, in Kairos, the decryption is bound indirectly to PCR 11 (which allows
> us to upgrade to newer kernels) and directly to PCR 7, which prevents booting if
> the UEFI databases have been altered, e.g. by enrolling a new key.

Reviewer: No need to do this change but it sounds quite important so I'd put on bold

```suggestion
**For this reason, in Kairos, the decryption is bound indirectly to PCR 11 (which allows
us to upgrade to newer kernels) and directly to PCR 7, which prevents booting if
the UEFI databases have been altered, e.g. by enrolling a new key.**
```

openssl x509 -outform DER -in db.crt -out db.cer
cert-to-efi-sig-list -g "$(< GUID.txt)" db.crt db.esl
sign-efi-sig-list -g "$(< GUID.txt)" -k KEK.key -c KEK.pem db db.esl db.auth
```

If you are planning to use `enki build-uki` command to prepare the new OS image,
create the following formats too or the command might complain if they are missing:

```bash
$ openssl x509 -outform der -in db.crt -out db.der
$ openssl x509 -inform DER -outform PEM -in db.der -out db.pem
```

#### Sign the new image with the new certificate

The `new-keys` directory created above can be used to prepare the new image with `enki`. E.g.

```bash
docker run --rm -v $PWD/unpacked:/unpacked \
  -v $PWD/build:/result \
  -v $PWD/new-keys/:/keys \
  quay.io/kairos/osbuilder-tools:v0.201.0 \
  build-uki dir:/unpacked \
  --output-dir /result \
  --keys /keys \
  --output-type container \
  --boot-branding "KairosNewUKI"
```

#### Enroll the new certificate in db

From withing Kairos (still booted in the old image), enroll the new db key:

```bash
sudo chattr -i /sys/firmware/efi/efivars/{PK,KEK,db}*
efi-updatevar -f db.auth db
```

{{% alert title="Warning" %}}

> You will need to `efitools` installed on the Kairos image for this commands to work!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will need the`efitools` installed on the Kairos image for this commands to work!
```

{{% /alert %}}

#### Enroll the old certificate in dbx

As describe earlier in this document, you should generate a `db-dbx.auth` file
from the old db key. This should now be enrolled in dbx. In user space again
(booted in the old Kairos image):

```bash
sudo efi-updatevar -f db-dbx.auth dbx
```

#### Upgrade to the new image

```
kairos-agent upgrade --source oci:myimage
```

> #### Unbind PCR 7

Reviewer 2: I think the ordering is wrong here no?  You mentioned above

- We "unbind" decryption from PCR 7, binding only to PCR 11 indirectly.
- We enroll the blacklisted cert in dbx.
- We reboot to the upgraded system.
- We bind decryption again both to PCR 11 and 7 (as before).

But here we are  doing it on a different order in the docs. Would it make sense to have it in the correct order?

Author: Good point. Actually the order between enrolling to dbx and upgrading doesn't matter. We just can't reboot before we unbind from PCR 7. But I'll re-order to avoid confusing people.

Author: re-ordered

Bind partition encryption only to PCR 11 policy. From within Kairos again:

```bash
echo "Generating temporary passphrase"
dd if=/dev/random bs=32 count=1 of=/tmp/random_keyfile

> echo "Adding password slot"

Author: ```suggestion
echo "Adding password slot"
# We temporarily switch to a passphrase decryption here, so that we can remove the "tpm" decryption
# option below. After we add the "tpm" option back (bound to different PCR registers),
# we remove the passphrase again.
```

> cryptsetup luksAddKey --token-type systemd-tpm2 /dev/vda2 /tmp/random_keyfile

Reviewer 2: maybe we should explain about this?

Author: How about the above ?

Reviewer 2: sounds good!

systemd-cryptenroll --unlock-key-file=/tmp/random_keyfile --tpm2-public-key=/run/systemd/tpm2-pcr-public-key.pem --tpm2-public-key-pcrs=11 --tpm2-pcrs= --tpm2-signature=/run/systemd/tpm2-pcr-signature.json --tpm2-device-key=/run/systemd/tpm2-srk-public-key.tpm2b_public /dev/vda3

echo "Removing the password slot"
systemd-cryptenroll --wipe-slot=password /dev/vda2
systemd-cryptenroll --wipe-slot=password /dev/vda3
```

Make sure you use the correct device paths for your encrypted partitions
(`/dev/vda2` and `/dev/vda3` in the example).

Now reboot:

```bash
reboot
```

#### Bind again to PCR 11 and 7

After rebooting to the upgraded image, bind the encryption again to PCR 7 (and 11):

```bash
echo "Generating temporary passphrase"
dd if=/dev/random bs=32 count=1 of=/tmp/random_keyfile

echo "Adding password slot"
cryptsetup luksAddKey --token-type systemd-tpm2 /dev/vda2 /tmp/random_keyfile
cryptsetup luksAddKey --token-type systemd-tpm2 /dev/vda3 /tmp/random_keyfile

echo "Removing the tpm2 slot"
systemd-cryptenroll /dev/vda2 --wipe-slot=tpm2
systemd-cryptenroll /dev/vda3 --wipe-slot=tpm2

echo "Adding tpm2 slot again (pcr 11 policy AND pcr 7)"

> echo "There is probably a bug in systemd preventing us from using the --tpm2-device-key"

Reviewer 2: Weird. It should have the public key in there always?

Author: where? Are you referring to the commands below? I pass the public key, yes. Do you mean I shouldn't?

Reviewer 2: in the machine I mean, you mention a bug preventing from using the device key, but its not clear to me what the issue is or why using the tpm-device instead makes it work?

skipping hitting the tpm device should be the way to go always, so we prevent blocking the tpm AND we can choose the PCR numbers that we want. Using --device-auto should be the last resort only done on systemd <255

Author: Well, it was you that suggested that this is a bug in systemd, remember? :D And actually you suggested the command that works.

Reviewer 2: yes, but thats for enrolling when we DONT want to bind to PCR7, when we want to do so, we can use the 

Basically:

 - using` --tpm2-device` makes it so the PCR7 is always binded no matter what flags you use
 - using `--tpm2-device-key` makes it so we can bind to anything, even leave PCR bind empty
 - using `--tpm2-device-key` also does not hit the TPM at all, which is nice as we can end up blocking it
 - `--tpm2-device-key` can only be used on systemd 255 (buntu 24.04 and Fedora 40)

So we should favor using always the `--tpm2-device-key` flag with its other `--tpm2-pcrs` and `--tpm2-public-key-pcrs` flags to have full control over whats binding or not.

And because we need to use that `--tpm2-device-key` in order to unbind from PCR7 we should only mention that flag and ignore the `--tpm2-device` one

Author: This is the error I'm getting:

```
root@localhost:/home/kairos# systemd-cryptenroll --unlock-key-file=/tmp/random_keyfile --tpm2-public-key=/run/systemd/tpm2-pcr-public-key.pem --tpm2-public-key-pcrs=11 --tpm2-pcrs=7 --tpm2-signature=/run/systemd/tpm2-pcr-signature.json --tpm2-device-key=/run/systemd/tpm2-srk-public-key.tpm2b_public /dev/vda2
/tmp/random_keyfile has 0644 mode that is too permissive, please adjust the ownership and access mode.
Must provide all PCR values when using TPM2 device key.
```

Author: ok, we decided to keep it as is for now.

---
title: "Revoking secure boot access"
linkTitle: "Revoking secure boot access"
weight: 10
date: 2022-06-12
---

This document describes how an administrator can prevent certain OS images from
booting on their hardware in the context of ["Trusted Boot"]({{< relref "../architecture/trustedboot" >}}).

Two different scenarios will be covered, with the process being only slightly different for each case.

> ## Scenario 1 - Signing certificate no longer trusted

Author: ```suggestion
## Scenario 1 - Signing certificate is no longer trusted
```

can still boot if the next update goes wrong.

Obviously the recovery image will also need to be signed with the new certificate.

The upgrade command is:

```
kairos-agent upgrade --recovery --source oci:<YOUR_UPGRADE_IMAGE_HERE>
```

The "fallback" image will be upgraded on the next upgrade. Read the ["Container based"]({{< relref "../architecture/container" >}})
document to understand more.

## Scenario 2 - One specific image is no longer trusted

In the previous scenario, we assumed that the signing certificate was compromised, which meant no image signed by that certificate should be bootable anymore.

In this scenario, only one specific image is considered "bad". For example, an image shipped with a well known security vulnerability.
In order to prevent this image from booting, its "hash" can be blacklisted.

The process is exactly the same as above, but instead of enrolling a certificate in the `dbx` database, we will enroll an image hash.

Follow the same instructions as in scenario 1, but skipping the steps where a new `db` key is created.

The easiest way to find the offending `.efi` file and calculate its signature is to boot the image which we

> want to blacklist in a sandboxed environment.

Author: I'm not sure we should suggest this. Maybe I should show instructions for the extraction from an ISO. But it gets messy.

Reviewer 2: yes indeed. Maybe on EFI build we should spit a file which contains info about the EFI image AND its ginature+hash and so on? So that can get archived somewhere in order to refer to it? So then you can just use that hash to blacklist it or know which signature it was used?

Reviewer 2: also maybe suggest that you can boot with the newer install media, and calculate it via that, so you are on a safe environment? boot from livecd, mount efi partition, calculate signatures or whatever

Author: Producing the information at build time (your first suggestion) doesn't sound enough. Maybe they no longer have access to those files anymore (the build could have happened months ago).

I prefer your second suggestion because it doesn't require access to any old files. But I need to try that out and come up with instructions. Let me try.

Author: I added some instructions around this (not copy-paste things)

openssl x509 -outform DER -in db.crt -out db.cer
cert-to-efi-sig-list -g "$(< GUID.txt)" db.crt db.esl
sign-efi-sig-list -g "$(< GUID.txt)" -k KEK.key -c KEK.pem db db.esl db.auth
```

If you are planning to use `enki build-uki` command to prepare the new OS image,
create the following formats too or the command might complain if they are missing:

```bash
$ openssl x509 -outform der -in db.crt -out db.der
$ openssl x509 -inform DER -outform PEM -in db.der -out db.pem
```

#### Sign the new image with the new certificate

The `new-keys` directory created above can be used to prepare the new image with `enki`. E.g.

```bash
docker run --rm -v $PWD/unpacked:/unpacked \
  -v $PWD/build:/result \
  -v $PWD/new-keys/:/keys \
  quay.io/kairos/osbuilder-tools:v0.201.0 \
  build-uki dir:/unpacked \
  --output-dir /result \
  --keys /keys \
  --output-type container \
  --boot-branding "KairosNewUKI"
```

#### Enroll the new certificate in db

From withing Kairos (still booted in the old image), enroll the new db key:

```bash
sudo chattr -i /sys/firmware/efi/efivars/{PK,KEK,db}*
efi-updatevar -f db.auth db
```

{{% alert title="Warning" %}}

> You will need the`efitools` installed on the Kairos image for this commands to work!

Author: ```suggestion
You will need the `efitools` installed on the Kairos image for this commands to work!
```
